.\"
.Dd July 27, 2001
.Dt PKG_GLOB 1
.Os FreeBSD
.Sh NAME
.Nm pkg_glob
.Nd a package glob expander with wildcards and dependency recursion support
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl haOqrR
.Op Fl x Ar pkgname_glob
.Op Ar pkgname_glob ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
command lists the installed packages matching given package globs,
optionally recursing through dependencies.
The output list is sorted
in alphabetical order.
Use
.Xr pkg_sort 1
to sort them in dependency order. (e.g.
.Li "pkg_glob -a | pkg_sort" )
.Pp
Before reading these instructions, you must understand that a
port/package can have the following two types of related
ports/packages:
.Bl -tag -width "dependent" -compact
.It required
Ports/packages that a port/package needs for it to be built and/or
run.
Port Makefiles refer to this type of ports/packages using the
.Dv BUILD_DEPENDS
and
.Dv RUN_DEPENDS
macros, respectively.
.It dependent
Ports/packages that need this port/package.
.El
.Sh OPTIONS
The following command line arguments are supported:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "--upward-recursive" -compact
.It Ar pkgname_glob
Specify one of these: a full pkgname, a pkgname without version, or a
shell glob pattern to match against pkgnames or their origins in which
you can use wildcards
.Sq * ,
.Sq \&? ,
and
.Sq [..] ,
an extended regular expression preceded by a colon
.Sq \&:
to match against pkgnames or their origins, or a date range
specification preceded by either
.Sq <
or
.Sq > .
.Pp
A date range specification must be in the following form:
.Pp
.D1 {<|<=|>=|>}{date|pkgname_glob}
.Pp
Which selects packages that had been installed before or after the
date or the package specified.
It is recommended to use the ISO 8601
format to specify a date, while various formats are accepted.
.Pp
Here are some pattern examples:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "':sh-[^-]+$'" -compact -nested
.It tcl-8.2.3
Specifically
.Sq tcl-8.2.3 .
.Pp
.It tcl
Whatever versions of
.Sq tcl
installed.
This would not match
.Sq tcl-sql
or
.Sq tcl-thread .
.Pp
.It 'ja-*'
Everything with a
.Sq ja-
prefix.
.Pp
.It '*gnome*'
Everything having
.Sq gnome
in the name.
.Pp
.It '*sh'
This would not match anything since the version part cannot be omitted
if a pattern contains wildcards.
.Pp
.It 'lang/*
Everything installed from the category
.Sq lang .
.Pp
.It :'sh-[^-]+$'
Everything which name ends with
.Sq sh .
.Pp
.It :'(?i)sql'
Everything having
.Sq sql
in the name, ignoring the case.
.Pp
.It '>=2001-09-20 08:00'
Everything that was installed after 2001-09-20 08:00:00 (local time).
.Pp
.It '<png'
Everything that was installed prior to
.Sq png .
.El
.Pp
.It Fl h
.It Fl -help
Show help and exit.
.Pp
.It Fl a
.It Fl -all
List all the installed packages.
Equivalent to specify
.Ar '*'
as
.Ar pkgname_glob .
.Pp
.It Fl O
.It Fl -omit-check
Omit sanity checks for dependencies.
By default,
.Nm
checks if all the packages to list have consistent dependencies,
though it takes extra time to calculate dependencies.
If you are sure
you have run
.Dq Li "pkgdb -F"
in advance, you can specify this option to omit the sanity checks.
.Pp
.It Fl q
.It Fl -noconfig
Do not read the configuration file. ($PREFIX/etc/pkgtools.conf)
.Pp
.It Fl r
.It Fl -recursive
List all those packages depending on the given packages as well.
.Pp
.It Fl R
.It Fl -upward-recursive
List all those packages required by the given packages as well.
.Pp
.It Fl x Ar pkgname_glob
.It Fl -exclude Ar pkgname_glob
Exclude packages matching the specified glob pattern.
Exclusion is
performed after recursing dependency in response to
.Fl r
and/or
.Fl R ,
which means, for example, the following command will list all the
packages depending on XFree86 but XFree86 will be excluded:
.Pp
.Nm
.Fl rx
.Ar XFree86 XFree86
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width "PKGTOOLS_CONF" -compact
.It Ev PKG_DBDIR
Alternative location for the installed package database.
Default is
.Dq Pa /var/db/pkg .
.Pp
.It Ev PKGTOOLS_CONF
Configuration file for the pkgtools suite.
Default is
.Dq Pa $PREFIX/etc/pkgtools.conf .
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "$PREFIX/etc/pkgtools.conf"
.It Pa /var/db/pkg
Default location of the installed package database.
.Pp
.It Pa $PREFIX/etc/pkgtools.conf
Default location of the pkgtools configuration file.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pkg_deinstall 1 ,
.Xr pkg_sort 1 ,
.Xr pkgdb 1 ,
.Xr portinstall 1 ,
.Xr ports_glob 1 ,
.Xr portupgrade 1 ,
.Xr portversion 1 ,
.Xr pkgtools.conf 5 ,
.Xr ports 7
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Akinori MUSHA Aq knu@iDaemons.org
