.\" $Id: pkg_deinstall.1,v 1.1.1.1 2006/06/13 12:59:01 sem Exp $
.\"
.Dd July 27, 2001
.Dt PKG_DEINSTALL 1
.Os FreeBSD
.Sh NAME
.Nm pkg_deinstall
.Nd a package deinstaller with wildcards and dependency recursion support 
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl hacdDfinOPqrRv
.Op Fl p Ar prefix
.Op Fl x Ar pkgname_glob
.Op Ar pkgname_glob ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
command is a wrapper of
.Xr pkg_delete 1
used to deinstall packages, which understands wildcards and is capable
of recursing through dependencies.
.Pp
Before reading these instructions, you must understand that a
port/package can have the following two types of related
ports/packages:
.Bl -tag -width "dependent" -compact
.It required
Ports/packages that a port/package needs for it to be built and/or
run.  Port Makefiles refer to this type of ports/packages using the
.Dv BUILD_DEPENDS
and 
.Dv RUN_DEPENDS
macros, respectively.
.It dependent
Ports/packages that need this port/package.
.El 
.Sh OPTIONS
The following command line arguments are supported.  The options
marked as 
.Sq [*]
are transparently passed to
.Xr pkg_delete 1 .
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "--upward-recursive" -compact
.It Ar pkgname_glob
Specify one of these: a full pkgname, a pkgname without version, a
shell glob pattern in which you can use wildcards
.Sq * ,
.Sq \&? ,
and
.Sq [..] ,
an extended regular expression preceded by a colon
.Sq \&: ,
or a date range specification preceded by either
.Sq <
or
.Sq > .
See
.Xr pkg_glob 1
for details and concrete examples.
.Pp
.It Fl h
.It Fl -help
Show help and exit.
.Pp
.It Fl a
.It Fl -all
Deinstall all the installed packages.  Equivalent to specify
.Ar '*'
as
.Ar pkgname_glob .
.Pp
.It Fl c
.It Fl -collate
For each package, check if any of the files installed by the package
has been overwritten by others.  If any, list them and abort the
deinstallation of the package.  This option is disabled by the
.Fl f
option.
.Pp
.It Fl d
.It Fl -rmdir
Remove empty directories created by file cleanup.  By default, only
files/directories explicitly listed in a package's contents (either as
normal files/directories or with the
.Li @dirrm
directive) will be removed at deinstallation time.  This option tells
.Nm
to also remove any directories that were emptied as a result of
removing the package. [*]
.Pp
.It Fl D
.It Fl -noscripts
If a deinstallation script exists for a given package, do not execute
it. [*]
.Pp
.It Fl f
.It Fl -force
Force removal of the package, even if a dependency is recorded or the
deinstall or require script fails. [*]
.Pp
.It Fl i
.It Fl -interactive
Request confirmation before attempting to delete each package,
regardless whether or not the standard input device is a
terminal.
.Pp
.It Fl n
.It Fl -noexecute
Don't actually deinstall a package, just report the steps that would
be taken if it were. [*]
.Pp
.It Fl O
.It Fl -omit-check
Omit sanity checks for dependencies.  By default,
.Nm
checks if all the packages to deinstall have consistent dependencies,
though it takes extra time to calculate dependencies.  If you are sure
you have run
.Dq Li "pkgdb -F"
in advance, you can specify this option to omit the sanity checks.
.Pp
.It Fl p Ar prefix
.It Fl -prefix Ar prefix
Set
.Ar prefix
as the directory in which to delete files from any installed packages
which do not explicitly set theirs.  For most packages, the prefix
will be set automatically to the installed location by
.Xr pkg_add 1 .
[*]
.Pp
.It Fl P
.It Fl -preserve
Preserve
.Fx
shared library files.
.Nm
invokes
.Xr file 1
to check if each file with the
.Dq .so.X ,
or
.Dq .so.X.Y
suffix is a
.Fx
shared library, copies all the found shared libraries to
.Pa $LOCALBASE/lib/compat/pkg ,
and runs
.Xr ldconfig 8
to update the ldconfig cache.
.Pp
This option is useful when you suspect that you still have some
binaries that depend on the shared library being deleted.
.Pp
.It Fl q
.It Fl -noconfig
Do not read the configuration file. ($PREFIX/etc/pkgtools.conf)
.Pp
.It Fl r
.It Fl -recursive
Deinstall all those packages depending on the given packages as well.
.Pp
.It Fl R
.It Fl -upward-recursive
Deinstall all those packages required by the given packages as well.
.Pp
.It Fl v
.It Fl -verbose
Turn on verbose output. [*]
.Pp
.It Fl x Ar pkgname_glob
.It Fl -exclude Ar pkgname_glob
Exclude packages matching the specified glob pattern.  Exclusion is
performed after recursing dependency in response to
.Fl r
and/or
.Fl R ,
which means, for example, the following command will deinstall all the
packages depending on XFree86 but leave XFree86 as it is:
.Pp
.Nm
.Fl rx
.Ar XFree86 XFree86
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width "PKGTOOLS_CONF" -compact
.It Ev PKG_DBDIR
Alternative location for the installed package database.  Default is
.Dq Pa /var/db/pkg
.Pp
.It Ev PKGTOOLS_CONF
Configuration file for the pkgtools suite.  Default is
.Dq Pa $PREFIX/etc/pkgtools.conf .
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "$PREFIX/etc/pkgtools.conf"
.It Pa /var/db/pkg
Default location of the installed package database.
.Pp
.It Pa $LOCALBASE/lib/compat/pkg
Location where shared library files are preserved.
.Pp
.It Pa $PREFIX/etc/pkgtools.conf
Default location of the pkgtools configuration file.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pkg_add 1 ,
.Xr pkg_delete 1 ,
.Xr pkg_glob 1 ,
.Xr pkg_info 1 ,
.Xr pkg_sort 1 ,
.Xr pkgdb 1 ,
.Xr portinstall 1 ,
.Xr portsclean 1 ,
.Xr portupgrade 1 ,
.Xr pkgtools.conf 5 ,
.Xr ports 7
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Akinori MUSHA Aq knu@iDaemons.org
