.\" $Id: pkgdb.1,v 1.3 2007/02/16 10:11:40 sem Exp $
.\"
.Dd September 22, 2001
.Dt PKGDB 1
.Os FreeBSD
.Sh NAME
.Nm pkgdb ,
.Nm pkg_which
.Nd tools to manage and search the package database
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl ahfFiLOQQquv
.Op Fl o Ar pkgname
.Op Fl s Ar /old/new/
.Nm pkg_which
.Op Fl hQQq
.Op Fl c Ar pkgname
.Op Ar file
.Ar ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
command is a tool to create or update the system package database which is
used by the
.Xr portupgrade 1
tool suite.  It maintains a hash that maps an
installed file to a package name, a hash that maps a package to an
origin, and a list of installed packages.
.Pp
.Nm pkg_which
looks in the package database to tell which package each specified
file came from.  If the database is outdated but you do not have permission to update it, it delegates tasks to
.Xr pkg_info 1 .
.Pp
Actually,
.Nm
and
.Nm pkg_which
are the same command, and are equivalent.
.Pp
The
.Nm
command also works as an interactive tool for fixing the package
registry database when
.Fl F
is specified.  It helps you resolve stale dependencies, unlink cyclic
dependencies, complete stale or missing origins and remove duplicates.
You should run this command periodically so
.Xr portupgrade 1
and other
.Li "pkg_*"
tools can work effectively and reliably.
.Sh OPTIONS
The following command line arguments are supported:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "--substitute" -compact
.It Ar file
Inquire which package
.Ar file
came from.  If the
.Ar file
is not present,
.Nm pkg_which
calls
.Xr which 1
to search
.Ev PATH
for the
.Ar file .
.Pp
.It Fl h
.It Fl -help
Show help and exit.
.Pp
.It Fl a
.It Fl -auto
Turn on automatic mode when
.Fl F
is also specified.
.Nm
only fixes discrepancies that can be fixed securely and leaves the
others.
.Pp
.It Fl -autofix
Shorthand of
.Fl -auto
.Fl -fix ( Fl aF ) .
.Pp
.It Fl c Ar PKGNAME
.It Fl -collate Ar PKGNAME
Show files installed by the given package that have been overwritten by
other packages.
.Pp
.It Fl f
.It Fl -force
Force; Specified with
.Fl u ,
update database regardless of timestamps.  Specified with
.Fl F ,
fix "held" packages too.
.Pp
.It Fl F
.It Fl -fix
Interactively fix the package registry database.
.Pp
.It Fl i
.It Fl -interactive
Turn on interactive mode.
.Pp
.It Fl L
.It Fl -fix-lost
Check and restore lost dependencies against the ports tree.
.Pp
.It Fl o Ar PKGNAME
.It Fl -origin Ar PKGNAME
Look up the origin of the given package in the package database.
.Pp
.It Fl O
.It Fl -omit-check
Specified with -F, turn off check dependencies against the ports tree.
Useful if you need a speed-up.
.Pp
.It Fl Q
.It Fl -quiet
Do not write anything to stdout.  Specified twice, do not write
anything to stderr either.  This is for internal use.
.Pp
.It Fl q
.It Fl -noconfig
Do not read the configuration file -
.Pa $PREFIX/etc/pkgtools.conf .
.Pp
.It Fl s Ar /OLD/NEW/
.It Fl -substitute Ar /OLD/NEW/
Substitute all the dependencies recorded as
.Ar OLD
with
.Ar NEW
and exit.
.Pp
.It Fl u
.It Fl -update
Update or create the package database file
.Pa pkgdb.db
in
.Pa $PKG_DBDIR ,
which is
.Pa /var/db/pkg
by default.
.Pp
Note: if the ports database files are stale, pkgdb will automatically update them before proceeding, so manual updating is not mandatory.
.Pp
.It Fl v
.It Fl -verbose
Turn on verbose output.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bl -bullet
.It
Get a list of files under
.Pa /usr/local
and
.Pa /usr/X11R6
that do not belong to any package:
.Pp
.Dl find /usr/local /usr/X11R6 -type f | xargs pkg_which -v | fgrep '?'
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width "PKGTOOLS_CONF" -compact
.It Ev PKG_DBDIR
Alternative location for the installed package database.  Default is
.Dq Pa /var/db/pkg .
.Pp
.It Ev PORTSDIR
Alternative location for the ports tree.  Default is
.Dq Pa /usr/ports .
.Pp
.It Ev PORTS_INDEX
Alternative location for the ports INDEX file.  Default is
.Dq Pa $PORTSDIR/INDEX .
.Pp
.It Ev PORTS_DBDIR
Alternative location for the ports database files.  Default is
.Dq Pa $PORTSDIR .
The database files in the directory are automatically created or
updated as necessary.  See
.Xr portsdb 1
for details.
.Pp
.It Ev PKGTOOLS_CONF
Configuration file for the pkgtools suite.  Default is
.Dq Pa $PREFIX/etc/pkgtools.conf .
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "$PREFIX/etc/pkgtools.conf" -compact
.It Pa /var/db/pkg
Default location of the package database.
.Pp
.It Pa $PREFIX/etc/pkgtools.conf
Default location of the pkgtools configuration file.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr portsclean 1 ,
.Xr portsdb 1 ,
.Xr portupgrade 1 ,
.Xr pkgtools.conf 5 ,
.Xr ports 7
.Sh HISTORY
The idea of
.Pa pkgdb.db
was taken from
.Nx .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Akinori MUSHA Aq knu@iDaemons.org
.An Sergey Matveychuk Aq sem@FreeBSD.org
.Sh BUGS
.Pp
Sometimes a database may get corrupt, and the pkgtools commands may
abort with a segmentation fault.  In such cases, run
.Dq Li "pkgdb -fu"
to rebuild the database, and the problems should go away.
