.\" $Id: portupgrade.1,v 1.9 2008/02/10 23:20:02 sem Exp $
.\"
.Dd August 26, 2012
.Dt PORTUPGRADE 1
.Os FreeBSD
.Sh NAME
.Nm portupgrade ,
.Nm portinstall
.Nd tools to upgrade installed packages or install new ones via ports or packages
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl habcCDDefFiknNOpPPqrRsuvwWy
.Op Fl A Ar command
.Op Fl B Ar command
.Op Fl l Ar file
.Op Fl L Ar format
.Op Fl S Ar command
.Op Fl x Ar pkgname_glob
.Oo
.Op Fl o Ar origin
.Op Fl m Ar make_args
.Op Fl M Ar make_env
.Ar pkgname_glob ...
.Oc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
command is used to upgrade installed packages via ports or packages.
The
.Nm portinstall
command is equivalent to
.Nm
.Fl N .
.Pp
Before reading these instructions, you must understand that a
port/package can have the following two types of related
ports/packages:
.Bl -tag -width "dependent" -compact
.It required
Ports/packages that a port/package needs for it to be built and/or
run.  Port Makefiles refer to this type of ports/packages using the
.Dv BUILD_DEPENDS
and 
.Dv RUN_DEPENDS
macros, respectively.
.It dependent
Ports/packages that need this port/package.
.El 
.Sh WARNING
.Bl -bullet
.It
Please read this manual page carefully and understand what you are
doing with
.Nm .
.It
When the tools suggest running
.Dq Li "pkgdb -F" ,
run it.  Upgrade a certain number of packages at once with an
inconsistent package database will surely cause bad results.
.It
Since
.Nm
allows you to upgrade your installed packages without rebuilding and
reinstalling dependent packages, upgraded packages may occasionally
cause binary incompatibilities.  To cope with this situation, use the
.Fl f ,
.Fl r
and
.Fl R 
options as necessary.
.It
Do not abort
.Nm
while it is updating the package database, or it will leave you a half
modified, inconsistent database.  Even if you don't do anything wrong,
a package database may get corrupt somehow when it is heavily updated.
In such cases, run
.Dq Li "pkgdb -fu"
to rebuild the database and rescue the tools from coredumping.
If it makes no effect, remove a database file (/var/db/pkg/pkgdb.db)
and rerun the command.
.It
Do not be lazy about backing up your precious data and configuration files,
including the package database in
.Dq Pa /var/db/pkg .
.El
.Sh OPTIONS
The following command line arguments are supported:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "--use-remote-packages" -compact
.It Ar pkgname_glob
Specify one of these: a full pkgname, a pkgname without version, a
shell glob pattern in which you can use wildcards
.Sq * ,
.Sq \&? ,
and
an extended regular expression preceded by a colon
.Sq \&: ,
or a date range specification preceded by either
.Sq <
or
.Sq > .
See
.Xr pkg_glob 1
for details and concrete examples.
.Pp
.It Fl h
.It Fl -help
Show help and exit.
.Pp
.It Fl a
.It Fl -all
Do with all the installed packages.  Equivalent to specify
.Ar '*'
as
.Ar pkgname_glob .
.Pp
.It Fl A Ar CMD
.It Fl -afterinstall Ar CMD
Run the specified command as root after each installation.
.Pp
.It Fl b
.It Fl -backup-packages
Keep backup packages of the old versions.
.Pp
.It Fl -batch
Run an upgrading process in a batch mode (with BATCH=yes).
.Pp
.It Fl B Ar CMD
.It Fl -beforebuild Ar CMD
Run the specified command before each build.  If the command exits in
failure, the port/package will be skipped.  Here is some typical uses:
.Pp
.Dl portupgrade -B 'cvs update' 'gnome*'
.Pp
.Dl portupgrade -B 'ports_glob -M $(pwd) | (cd ../..; xargs cvs up)' slave/port
.Pp
.Dl portupgrade -aB 'test \&! `make -V IS_INTERACTIVE`'
.Pp
.It Fl c
.It Fl -config
Run
.Dq Li "make config-conditional"
before everything for all tasks.
.Pp
.It Fl C
.It Fl -force-config
Run
.Dq Li "make config"
before everything for all tasks.
.Pp
.It Fl D
.It Fl -distclean
Delete failed distfiles and retry if checksum fails.  Specified twice,
do
.Dq Li "make distclean"
before each fetch or build.
.Pp
.It Fl e
.It Fl -emit-summaries
Emit summary info after each port processing.
.Pp
.It Fl f
.It Fl -force
Force the upgrade of a package even if it is to be a downgrade or just
a reinstall of the same version, or the port is held by user using the
HOLD_PKGS variable in
.Pa pkgtools.conf .
.Pp
.It Fl F
.It Fl -fetch-only
Only fetch distfiles or packages (if
.Fl P
is specified), do not build, upgrade or install anything.  This is
useful if you want to download all the needed distfiles or packages at
once in advance of installing or upgrading.
.Pp
By default, if a port or a package fails to build or install, its
dependents will be skipped.
.Pp
.It Fl -ignore-moved
Do not read MOVED file.
.Pp
.It Fl i
.It Fl -interactive
Turn on interactive mode.  You are asked for approval before each
suggested installation or upgrade.  This option implies
.Fl v .
.Pp
.It Fl k
.It Fl -keep-going
Force the upgrade of a package even if some of the requisite packages
have failed to upgrade in advance.
.Pp
.It Fl l Ar FILE
.It Fl -results-file Ar FILE
Specify a file name to save the results to.  By default,
.Nm
does not save results as a file.
.Pp
.It Fl L Ar FORMAT
.It Fl -log-file Ar FORMAT
Specify a
.Xr printf 3
style format to determine the log file name for each port.
.Dq %s::%s
is appended if it does not contain a
.Sq % .
Category and portname are given as arguments, in the order named.
.Pp
.It Fl m
.It Fl -make-args
Specify arguments to append to each
.Xr make 1
command line.
.Pp
.It Fl M
.It Fl -make-env
Specify arguments to prepend to each
.Xr make 1
command line.
.Pp
.It Fl n
.It Fl -noexecute
Do not actually install or upgrade any packages; just show what would
be done.  This option implies
.Fl v
and negates
.Fl i
and
.Fl y .
.Pp
.It Fl N
.It Fl -new
Install a new port/package when a specified package is not installed.
Prior to the installation a new port/package, all the required
packages are upgraded.
.Pp
If this option is specified, you can specify a portorigin glob as well
as a pkgname glob to specify which port to install.  See
.Xr portsdb 1
for the details of the
.Sq portorigin glob .
.Pp
This option makes
.Nm portupgrade
behave as if it were called as
.Nm portinstall .
.Pp
.It Fl o Ar ORIGIN
.It Fl -origin Ar ORIGIN
Specify a port to upgrade the following package with.
.Pp
.It Fl O
.It Fl -omit-check
Omit sanity checks for dependencies.  By default,
.Nm
checks if all the packages to upgrade have consistent dependencies,
though it takes extra time to calculate dependencies.  If you are sure
you have run
.Dq Li "pkgdb -F"
in advance, you can specify this option to omit the sanity checks.
.Pp
.It Fl p
.It Fl -package
Build a package when each specified port is installed or upgraded.  If
a package is upgraded and its dependent packages are given from the
command line (including the case where
.Fl r
is specified), build packages for them as well.
.Pp
.It Fl P
.It Fl -use-packages
Use packages instead of ports whenever available.
.Nm
searches the local directories listed in
.Ev PKG_PATH
for each package to install or upgrade the current installation with,
and if none is found,
.Xr pkg_fetch 1
is invoked to fetch one from a remote site.  If it doesn't work
either, the port is used.
.Pp
However, the source will still be used if the port is listed in USE_PORTS_ONLY variable in
.Pa pkgtools.conf .
.Pp
.It Fl PP
.It Fl -use-packages-only
Never use the port even if a package is not available either locally
or remotely, although you still have to keep your ports tree
up-to-date so that
.Nm
can check out what the latest version of each port is.
.Pp
.It Fl q
.It Fl -quiet
Do not display a message when -N specified and there is already installed package.
.Pp
.It Fl -noconfig
Do not read the configuration file -
.Pa $PREFIX/etc/pkgtools.conf .
.Pp
.It Fl r
.It Fl -recursive
Act on all those packages depending on the given packages as well.
.Pp
.It Fl R
.It Fl -upward-recursive
Act on all those packages required by the given packages as well. (When
specified with
.Fl F ,
fetch recursively, including the brand new, uninstalled ports that an
upgraded port requires)
.Pp
.It Fl s
.It Fl -sudo
Run commands under
.Xr sudo 8
where needed.
.Pp
.It Fl S Ar CMD
.It Fl -sudo-command Ar CMD
Specify an alternative to
.Xr sudo 8 .
e.g.
.Dq Ar 'su root -c "%s"'
(default:
.Ar sudo )
.Pp
.It Fl u
.It Fl -uninstall-shlibs
Do not preserve old shared libraries.  By default,
.Nm
preserves shared libraries on uninstallation for safety.  See the
.Xr pkg_deinstall 1
manpage and check out the
.Fl P
option for details. 
.Pp
.It Fl v
.It Fl -verbose
Turn on verbose output.
.Pp
.It Fl w
.It Fl -noclean
Do not
.Dq Li "make clean"
before each build.
.Pp
.It Fl W
.It Fl -nocleanup
Do not
.Dq Li "make clean"
after each installation.
.Pp
.It Fl -without-env-upgrade
Do not set UPGRADE_* environment variables.
.Pp
.It Fl x Ar GLOB
.It Fl -exclude Ar GLOB
Exclude packages matching the specified glob pattern.  Exclusion is
performed after recursing dependency in response to
.Fl r
and/or
.Fl R ,
which means, for example, the following command will upgrade all the
packages depending on XFree86 but leave XFree86 as it is:
.Pp
.Dl portupgrade -rx XFree86 XFree86
.Pp
.It Fl y
.It Fl -yes
Answer yes to all the questions.  This option implies
.Fl v
and negates
.Fl n .
.El
.Sh TECHNICAL DETAILS
.Nm
upgrades installed packages via ports or packages without necessarily
having to reinstall required or dependent packages by adjusting the
package registry database.
.Pp
The procedures it takes are briefly shown as below:
.Bl -enum -offset indent
.It
If
.Fl P
is not given, jump to
.Sy 4 .
Otherwise search the local directories listed in
.Ev PKG_PATH
for a newer package tarball.  If found, jump to
.Sy 5 .
.It
Fetch the latest package from a remote site using
.Xr pkg_fetch 1 .
If the fetched package is the latest, jump to
.Sy 5 .
If
.Fl P
is given twice (i.e.
.Fl PP )
and the fetched package is not the latest but at least newer than the
current installation, jump to
.Sy 5 .
.It
If
.Fl P
is given twice (i.e.
.Fl PP ) ,
stop the task.
.It
Build the corresponding port of the given installed package.
.It
Fix the dependency information of the packages that depend on the
given package.
.It
Back up the current installation of the given package using
.Xr pkg_create 1 .
Note that the backup tarball will be very large if the package is
a big monster like XFree86.  Please ensure you have sufficient
disk space (refer to the ENVIRONMENT section to know where) to save
the backup tarball. (Perhaps a new option to omit backups will be
added in the future)
.It
Back up the current package registration files of the given package.
.It
Uninstall the given package forcibly, preserving shared libraries
unless
.Fl u
is specified.
.It
Install the new version via ports or packages, depending on the
conditions in
.Sy 1 ,
.Sy 2
and
.Sy 3 .
.It
If the installation fails,
.Bl -enum -offset indent -nested
.It
Restore the old installation backed up in 
.Sy 6 .
.It
Restore the old package registration files backed up in
.Sy 7 .
.It
Revert the dependency information fixed in
.Sy 5 .
.El
.It
Remove the dependencies obsoleted in this upgrade.
.It
Run
.Dq Li "portsclean -L"
to delete duplicate libraries and put away old libraries.
.It
Run
.Dq Li "pkgdb -aF"
to fix up stale dependencies and reconstruct
.Pa +REQUIRED_BY
files.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bl -bullet
.It
Upgrade
.Ar glib :
.Pp
.Dl portupgrade glib
.Pp
As you see, you can omit version numbers.  If multiple versions are
installed, each of them is upgraded unless they share a port origin.
(For example you may probably have
.Ar foo-1.02
and
.Ar foo-1.03
recorded somehow; run
.Dq Li "pkgdb -F"
to fix the situation)
.Pp
.It
Upgrade
.Ar XFree86
and
.Ar Mesa ,
passing
.Fl DWANT_GGI
to
.Xr make 1
for
.Ar Mesa :
.Pp
.Dl portupgrade XFree86 -m '-DWANT_GGI' Mesa
.Pp
When
.Nm
deals with multiple packages, it automatically sorts the packages in
dependency order before everything.
.Pp
.Fl m
/
.Fl -make-args
is the option to specify options to pass to
.Xr make 1 .
.Pp
.It
Upgrade all the GNOME packages, keeping build logs in
.Dq Pa /var/tmp/portupgrade-<category>::<portname>.log :
.Pp
.Dl portupgrade -L /var/tmp/portupgrade-%s::%s.log '*gnome*'
.Pp
You can use the wildcards as in
.Xr sh 1 .
Perl compatible extended regular expressions are also available by
prepending a colon
.Sq :
to a pattern.  In the above case, you could type:
.Ar :gnome .
.Pp
.Fl L
/
.Fl -log-prefix
is the option to tell
.Nm
to keep the build log as a file for each port build.  Regardless of
the option,
.Nm
always watches the build output of each port and when a build fails it
guesses the reason why it has failed.
.Pp
.It
Upgrade
.Ar sawfish
and all that sawfish depends on, building binary packages for the
upgraded packages, with the verbose mode on:
.Pp
.Dl portupgrade -Rpv sawfish
.Pp
.Fl R
/
.Fl -upward-recursive
is the option to tell
.Nm
to recurse upwards through dependencies.  In the above case,
.Ar rep-gtk ,
.Ar librep ,
.Ar imlib ,
.Ar gnomelibs ,
.Ar XFree86
etc. would be upgraded.
.Pp
.Fl p
/
.Fl -package
is the option to tell
.Nm
to build a binary package while it upgrades a package.
.Pp
.Fl v
/
.Fl -verbose
is the option to turn the verbose mode on.
.Pp
.It
Upgrade
.Ar glib
and all that depend on it, confirming each upgrade:
.Pp
.Dl portupgrade -ri glib
.Pp
.Fl r
/
.Fl -recursive
is the option to tell
.Nm
to recurse downwards through dependencies.  In the above case,
.Ar gtk
and all GNOME related packages would be upgraded.
.Pp
.Fl i
/
.Fl -interactive
is the option to tell
.Nm
to ask you for approval before performing something important.
.Pp
.It
Rebuild and reinstall all ports that depend on
.Ar sdl ,
but not
.Ar sdl
itself:
.Pp
.Dl portupgrade -rfx sdl sdl
.Pp
.Fl f
/
.Fl -force
is the option to force
.Nm
to upgrade a package even if it does not seem to be needed judging
from a version comparison.
.Pp
.Fl x
/
.Fl -exclude
is the option to specify an exclusion pattern.
.Pp
.It
Rebuild and reinstall all that ports that were installed prior to the date
2001-09-20:
.Pp
.Dl portupgrade -f '<2001-09-20'
.Pp
You can also select packages by a date range.
.Pp
.It
Rebuild and reinstall all the dependent packages of
.Ar png
that were installed prior to
.Ar png :
.Pp
.Dl portupgrade -fr png -x '>=png'
.Pp
You may use a package to specify a date.
.Pp
.It
Fetch all the distfiles that are needed to upgrade all the installed
packages at once, but do not upgrade anything yet:
.Pp
.Dl portupgrade -aFR
.Pp
.Fl a
/
.Fl -all
is equivalent to specifying an
.Sq * .
.Pp
.Fl F
/
.Fl -fetch
is the option to tell
.Nm
to not upgrade anything but just fetch distfiles.
.Pp
It is necessary to specify
.Fl R
in addition to
.Fl a
because some of the upgraded ports might require new ports that are
not installed yet.
.Pp
.It
Replace
.Ar ghostscript-gnu
with
.Ar ghostscript-afpl :
.Pp
.Dl portupgrade -o print/ghostscript-afpl ghostscript-gnu
.Pp
.Fl o
/
.Fl -origin
was originally the option to supply a missing origin of an outdated
package before
.Fx 4.2 ,
but this example shows another useful usage.  Use
.Nm
like this, and all the dependencies on the old package
.Ar ( ghostscript-gnu )
will be succeeded to the new one
.Ar ( ghostscript-afpl )
cleanly, without leaving inconsistency.
.Pp
.It
Upgrade
.Ar glib
using a package.  If necessary, download one from a remote ftp site:
.Pp
.Dl portupgrade -P glib
.Pp
.Fl P
/
.Fl -use-packages
is the option to tell
.Nm
to use packages instead of ports where available.
.Pp
.It
Let's perform a massive binary upgrade using the packages stored on a
CD-ROM, but before that I want to figure out what will be upgraded:
.Pp
.Dl env PKG_PATH=/mnt/cdrom/packages/All portupgrade -anPP
.Pp
.Fl n
/
.Fl -noexecute
is the option to tell
.Nm
not to commit any upgrade but just show what would be done.
.Pp
Double
.Fl P
tells
.Nm
to use packages only;
.Nm
will not upgrade a package if a package file
.Pa ( *.tbz )
to upgrade the package with is not available.
.Pp
If you don't want
.Nm
to download packages which are not on the CD-ROM, set
.Ev PKG_FETCH
to something like
.Dq Li "/bin/false" .
.El
.Sh TIPS
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
After performing a binary upgrade, it is strongly recommended that you
run
.Dq Li "pkgdb -F"
to fix broken dependencies introduced by the newly installed packages.
.Pp
.It
Do a massive network binary upgrade:
.Pp
.Dl portupgrade -aPPR
.Pp
.It
When in doubt, use the
.Nm
options such as
.Fl n
and
.Fl i
to see what would be done, or use
.Xr pkg_glob 1
to see how it expands glob patterns.
.Pp
.It
To perform upgrades effectively and correctly, remember to run
.Xr pkgdb 1
with
.Fl F
on occasions to fix dependency discrepancies, and run
.Xr portsdb 1
with
.Fl Uu
every time you CVSup the ports tree to keep your ports INDEX database
up-to-date in sync with the tree.
.Pp
.It
To check for available upgrades, give
.Xr portversion 1
a try instead of
.Xr pkg_version 1 .
It has comparable usage with
.Xr pkg_version 1
but runs much faster.  Also the output script of
.Dq Li "portversion -c"
utilizes
.Xr portupgrade 1
for upgrading.
.Pp
.It
To deinstall packages, give
.Xr pkg_deinstall 1
a try instead of
.Xr pkg_delete 1 .
It is a wrapper of
.Xr pkg_delete 1
with additional features, such as recursive deinstall and shared
library preservation.
.Pp
.It
To clean unreferenced distfiles, working directories and old shared
libraries, use
.Xr portsclean 1 .
.Pp
.It
To track the change history of a port, use
.Xr portcvsweb 1 .
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width "UPGRADE_PORT_VER" -compact
.It Ev PKG_DBDIR
Alternative location for the installed package database.  Default is
.Dq Pa /var/db/pkg .
.Pp
.It Ev PORTSDIR
Alternative location for the ports tree.  Default is
.Dq Pa /usr/ports .
.Pp
.It Ev PORTS_INDEX
Alternative location for the ports INDEX file.  Default is
.Dq Pa $PORTSDIR/INDEX .
.Pp
.It Ev PORTS_DBDIR
Alternative location for the ports database files.  Default is
.Dq Pa $PORTSDIR .
.Pp
.It Ev PKG_TMPDIR
.It Ev TMPDIR
(In that order) Temporary directory where
.Nm 
attempts to create backup files.  If neither is defined,
.Dq Pa /var/tmp
is used.  Note that this directory must have enough free space when
upgrading a big package. (See the TECHNICAL DETAILS above)
.Pp
.It Ev PACKAGES
Base directory where
.Nm
creates packages.  Default is
.Dq Pa $PORTSDIR/packages .
.Pp
.It Ev PKG_PATH
A list of directories where
.Nm
searches for packages, separated by colons.  Default is
.Dq Pa $PACKAGES/All .
.Pp
.It Ev PKG_SUFX
Suffix for packages.  Default is the value defined in
.Pa bsd.port.mk
or
.Pa /etc/make.conf .
.Pp
.It Ev PKGTOOLS_CONF
Configuration file for the pkgtools suite.  Default is
.Dq Pa $PREFIX/etc/pkgtools.conf .
.Pp
.It Ev PORTUPGRADE
Default options for
.Nm
(e.g.
.Fl v )
.Pp
.It Ev UPGRADE_TOOL
The environment variable is set to upgrade tool name. Always is set to
.Dq portupgrade .
.Pp
.It Ev UPGRADE_PORT
The variable is set to a port name and version (as PKGNAME make variable)
which is upgraded.
.Pp
.It Ev UPGRADE_PORT_VER
A version number extracted from UPGRADE_PORT (it's the same as in PKGVERSION
make variable).
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "$PREFIX/etc/pkgtools.conf"
.It Pa /var/tmp
Temporary directory for creating backup files, if environmental
variables
.Ev PKG_TMPDIR
or
.Ev TMPDIR
do not point to a suitable directory.
.It Pa /var/db/pkg
Default location of the installed package database.
.It Pa /usr/ports
Default location of the ports tree and the ports database files.
.It Pa /usr/ports/packages/All
Default location of backup packages saved with -b.
.Pp
.It Pa $PREFIX/etc/pkgtools.conf
Default location of the pkgtools configuration file.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pkg_add 1 ,
.Xr pkg_deinstall 1 ,
.Xr pkg_delete 1 ,
.Xr pkg_glob 1 ,
.Xr pkg_info 1 ,
.Xr pkg_sort 1 ,
.Xr pkgdb 1 ,
.Xr portcvsweb 1 ,
.Xr ports_glob 1 ,
.Xr portsclean 1 ,
.Xr portsdb 1 ,
.Xr portversion 1 ,
.Xr pkgtools.conf 5 ,
.Xr ports 7
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Akinori MUSHA Aq knu@iDaemons.org
.An Sergey Matveychuk Aq sem@FreeBSD.org
.Sh BUGS
SUSP (^Z) doesn't work during a build/install.
.Pp
Sometimes a database may get corrupt and the pkgtools commands start
to abort due to segmentation fault.  In such cases, run
.Dq Li "pkgdb -fu"
to rebuild the database, and the problems will go away.
If the command failed itself, remove a database file (/var/db/pkg/pkgdb.db)
and run it again.
.Pp
Some third-party or hand-made packages have invalid package names
which make
.Nm
and the related tools angry.  To completely hide the existence of a
package from them, put (just
.Xr touch 1 )
a dummy file named "+IGNOREME" in the package directory.
