.\"
.Dd August 11, 2001
.Dt PORTSCLEAN 1
.Os FreeBSD
.Sh NAME
.Nm portsclean
.Nd a tool to clean ports/packages garbage
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl hCDDiLnPPQQq
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a tool to help users clean out the working directories of their ports
tree, no longer referenced distfiles, outdated package files, and obsolete
or orphaned shared libraries that were possibly left by
.Xr pkg_deinstall 1 's
.Fl P
option.
.Sh OPTIONS
The following command line arguments are supported:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "--interactive" -compact
.It Fl h
.It Fl -help
Show help and exit.
.Pp
.It Fl C
.It Fl -workclean
Clean out all the working directories of the ports tree. (cf.
.Ev WRKDIRPREFIX )
.Pp
.It Fl D
.It Fl -distclean
Clean out all the distfiles that are not referenced by any port in the
ports tree.
Specified twice (i.e.
.Fl DD ) ,
clean out all the distfiles that are not referenced by any port that is
currently installed. (cf.
.Ev DISTDIR )
.Pp
.It Fl i
.It Fl -interactive
Turn on interactive mode.
The user is asked for approval before each
suggested file/directory is removed.
.Pp
.It Fl L
.It Fl -libclean
Clean out old, duplicate and/or orphaned shared libraries.
.Pp
.Nm
first deletes duplicate shared libraries where appropriate, then puts
away old and orphaned shared libaries to
.Pa /usr/local/lib/compat/pkg
updating symlinks properly.
To keep binaries working,
.Xr ldconfig 8
is run after each library deletion or move.
.Pp
.Nm
is so wise you can safely run it without turning
.Fl i
on.
However, if you want to do further cleanup, specify the flag to
be asked on possibly unneeded libraries too.
.Pp
You can use the
.Pa sysutils/libchk
port to check which library is linked with which binaries.
.Pp
.It Fl n
.It Fl -noexecute
Do not actually delete any files.
.Pp
.It Fl P
.It Fl -pkgclean
Clean up outdated package tarballs and dead symlinks in the packages
directory. (cf.
.Ev PACKAGES )
Specified twice (i.e.
.Fl PP ) ,
delete all the package tarballs in the directory.
.Pp
.It Fl Q
.It Fl -quiet
Do not write anything to stdout.
Specified twice (i.e.
.Fl QQ ) ,
do not write
anything to stderr either.
This is for internal use.
.Pp
.It Fl q
.It Fl -noconfig
Do not read the configuration file -
.Pa $PREFIX/etc/pkgtools.conf .
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width "PKGTOOLS_CONF" -compact
.It Ev PORTSDIR
.It Ev DISTDIR
.It Ev WRKDIRPREFIX
.It Ev PACKAGES
.Nm
detects these variables defined in the configuration file
.Pa $PREFIX/etc/pkgtools.conf ,
.Pa /etc/make.conf
or environment variables to clean files properly.
See
.Xr portupgrade 1
for details of these variables.
.Pp
.It Ev PKGTOOLS_CONF
Configuration file for the pkgtools suite.
Default is
.Dq Pa $PREFIX/etc/pkgtools.conf .
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "$PREFIX/etc/pkgtools.conf"
.It Pa $PREFIX/etc/pkgtools.conf
Default location of the pkgtools configuration file.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr libchk 1 ,
.Xr pkg_deinstall 1 ,
.Xr pkgdb 1 ,
.Xr pkgtools.conf 5 ,
.Xr ports 7
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Akinori MUSHA Aq knu@iDaemons.org
